
EXPERIMENT NO: 02
FAMILIARIZATION OF PYTHON PROGRAMMING LANGUAGE


PYTHON

Python is a high-level, interpreted, and general-purpose programming language known for its simple and readable syntax.
Creator: Created by Guido van Rossum.
Release: First released in 1991.
Philosophy: Python emphasizes code readability, allowing developers to write clear, logical code for small and large-scale projects.
Paradigms: It supports multiple programming paradigms, including procedural, object-oriented, and functional programming.

Features of Python
Easy to Learn and Use: Python syntax is clear and intuitive, resembling natural English. Minimal boilerplate code is required.
Interpreted Language: Python code is executed line by line by the interpreter, which makes debugging easier and programs more dynamic.
Cross-Platform Compatibility: It is platform-independent. Code written on one OS (e.g., Windows) can run on others (e.g., Linux, macOS) with minimal changes.
Dynamically Typed: You don't need to declare variable types; the interpreter determines the type at runtime.
Extensive Standard Library: Comes with built-in modules for math, string processing, file handling, regular expressions, web services, etc.
Object-Oriented and Functional: Supports both Object-Oriented and Functional programming styles.
Large Ecosystem and Community: Python has a huge developer community and thousands of third-party libraries for data science, machine learning, web development, and more.
Embeddable and Extendable: Python can be embedded in other languages (like C++) and be extended with code written in other languages.

Applications of Python
Web Development:
Frameworks: Django, Flask, FastAPI.
Use: Used for backend logic, handling user requests, and server-side scripting.
Data Science and Data Analysis:
Libraries: Pandas, NumPy, Matplotlib, Seaborn.
Use: Data manipulation, cleaning, and joining.
Machine Learning and Artificial Intelligence (AI):
Libraries: Scikit-learn, TensorFlow, Keras, PyTorch, XGBoost.
Use: Building predictive models, neural networks, and intelligent systems.
Automation and Scripting:
Tools: OS, JSON, Re, CSV, Random, Subprocess, Requests, Beautiful Soup, Selenium, PyAutoGUI, Schedule.
Use: Automating repetitive tasks, system administration, file handling, and web scraping.
Game Development:
Library: Pygame.
Use: Simple 2D games and prototypes.
Cybersecurity and Ethical Hacking:
Use: Writing penetration testing scripts, socket programming, and analyzing network traffic.
Scientific Computing: Libraries like SciPy and Numba.
Image/Media Processing: Libraries like PIL/Pillow, OpenCV, moviepy, PyDub.

Limitations of Python
Performance Issues: Python is an interpreted and dynamically typed language, making it generally slower than compiled languages like C or Java.
High Memory Consumption: Python uses more memory than some lower-level languages, which makes it unsuitable for memory-constrained devices (e.g., embedded systems).
Runtime Errors: Being dynamically typed means type-related bugs can appear during run-time, not during compilation.
Weak in True Threading (GIL): Python’s Global Interpreter Lock (GIL) prevents true parallel execution of threads, limiting multicore CPU performance in some applications.
Mobile Application Development: Python is not commonly used for mobile app development; Java (Android) and Swift (iOS) dominate this field.

Python Data Types
Type Category
Type
Example
Description

Numeric Types

int

x = 10

Integer numbers



float

x = 10.15

Decimal (real) numbers



complex

x = 20+2J

Complex numbers

Text Type

str

x = "hello"

Text (string of characters)

Sequence Types

list

x = [1, 2, 3]

Ordered, mutable



tuple

x = (1, 2, 3)

Ordered, immutable



range

range(15)

Sequence of numbers

Mapping Type

dict

x = {"name": "Alice", "age": 24}

Key-value pairs

Set Types

set

x = {1, 2, 3}

Unordered, unique values



frozenset

frozenset({1, 2})

Immutable set

Boolean Type

bool

True, False

Logical values

None Type

NoneType

None

Represents null/empty value

Basic Python Commands

Command

Syntax/Example

Purpose

Print Output

print("Hello") or print("Enter name:")

Displays output to the console.

Input from User

x = input("Enter name: ")

Takes input from the user and stores it in a variable.

Variable

x = 10

Stores a value in a memory location.

Data Type

type(x)

Returns the type of a variable.

List

mylist = [1, 2, 3]

Creates a list.

Loop (for)

for i in range(5): print(i)

Iterates over a sequence.

Loop (while)

while x < 5: x = x + 1

Repeats code as long as a condition is true.

If Condition

if x > 0: print("Positive")

Executes code conditionally.

Function

def add(a, b): return a + b

Defines a reusable block of code.

Import Module

import math

Imports external libraries/modules.

File Read/Write

open("file.txt", "r")

Opens a file for reading, writing, etc.
